Transcriber: Liam Regan
Reviewer: Denise RQ
Hi! Hi!
I am forty-five years old.
I know I look amazing, thank you.
(Laughter)
I am forty-five years old
and I have never once
unselfconsciously held hands
with a lover in public.
I am forty-five years old
and I have never once
casually, comfortably, carelessly
held hands with a partner in public.
I don't know how many of you
can even imagine what that might be like
because, of course,
it's a small thing, isn't it,
holding hands with a lover in public?
And it's not that nobody wanted to,
it's just that we didn't feel comfortable.
Now, like many gay people,
when I was younger, in my young life,
I struggled at one time against being gay.
I didn't want to be different.
I didn't want to be this thing
that I didn't really understand.
This thing that I had learned
was shameful or jokeworthy.
But when I eventually did
sort of understand
and come to accept who and what I am,
I have never since that moment,
never once, have I ever wished
that it turned out differently!
I am thoroughly, deeply, delightedly,
happy to be gay!
(Applause)
It suits me! (Laughter)
I am really good at it! (Laughter)
And yet, everyday
I am jealous of straight people,
because that private, little, small,
intimate gesture of affection
has never once been mine.
Everyday I see young, straight couples
walking through the park
and they are casually holding hands
and I am jealous of them!
I see a teenage couple at a bus stop
and she is leaning into him,
and her hand is in his,
and both of their hands are
tucked into his jacket pocket for warmth,
and I am jealous of that teenage couple!
I will sometimes see a man
who unconsciously
put his hand, a protective arm,
around his girlfriend
and she'll link her fingers through his,
and I am jealous of that!
Maybe you're on Grafton Street
and you see an older lady
and she gestures to draw
her husband's attention
to something in the window,
and without even thinking
he just takes her hand
and they stand there
peering into the window
discussing whatever it is
that drew their attention
and their hands are
just carelessly joined together,
and I am jealous of that!
Because gay people do not
get to hold hands in public
without first considering the risk.
Gay people do not get to put an arm
through another arm
or put a hand on a boyfriend's waist
without first considering
what the possible
consequences might be.
We look around to see:
where are we, who's around,
is it late at night?
What kind of area is it?
Are there bored teenagers
hanging around looking for amusement?
Are there bunches of lads
standing outside a pub?
And if we decided OK,
maybe it is, it's OK,
well then we do hold hands,
but the thing is that now those hands
are not casual and thoughtless.
They are now
considered and weighed.
But we stroll on hand in hand
trying to be just normal and carefree
just like everybody else,
but actually we're not!
Because we are constantly scanning
the pavement ahead, just in case.
And then even if we do see, you know,
a group of blokes coming towards us,
maybe we will decide sort of silently
to continue holding hands, defiantly!
But now our small, intimate gesture
between two people in love
is no longer a small, intimate gesture.
It is a political act of defiance,
and it has been ruined.
And anyway then you sort of think:
"Well, we've had such a lovely afternoon
poking around in that garden center
looking at things for the garden
we don't actually have."
(Laughter)
And then you think, all it will take
is one spat "faggots" or a split lip
to turn that really lovely afternoon
into a bad afternoon
that you will never want to remember.
And even if you are somewhere
where you think:
"Ah, it's perfectly fine here.
Nobody here is going to react badly
to our tiny gesture."
You know, I don't know, say you're
wandering through a posh department store.
Even then people will notice.
Now, they may only notice
because they're thinking:
"Isn't nice to see two gays
holding hands in public?"
But they still notice,
and I don't want them to notice
because then our small, intimate,
private, little, human gesture
has been turned into a statement,
and I don't want that!
Our little, private, gesture,
like Schrödinger's cat,
is altered simply by being observed.
We live in this sort of homophobic world,
and you might think
that a small, little thing
like holding hands in public,
"Well, it's just a small thing,"
and you're right!
It is indeed just a small thing.
But it is one of many small things
that make us human,
and there are lots of small things
everyday that LGBT people
have to put up with,
that other people
don't have to put up with.
Lots of small things
that we have to put up with
in order to be safe or not to be
the object of ridicule or scorn.
And we are expected
to put up with those things
and just thank our blessings
that we don't live in a country
where we could be imprisoned
or executed for being gay.
And we are so used to making
those small adjustments everyday,
that even now we rarely ourselves
even notice that we are doing it,
because it is just part
of the background of our lives.
This constant malign presence
that we have assimilated,
and if we complain about it, we are told
we have nothing to complain about
because: "Aren't you lucky
that you don't live in Uganda?"
And yes, I am lucky
that I don't live in Uganda,
but that's not good enough!
This isn't some sort of game
or competition
where the person who has it the worst
wins the right to complain
and everybody else has to just
put up or shut up.
Our society is homophobic!
It is infused with homophobia.
It is dripping with homophobia.
And when you are forty-five years old and
you have spent thirty years putting up,
thirty years absorbing
all of those small slights
and intimidations and sneers
and occasionally much worse,
you just get tired of it.
You get fed up putting up.
I am fed up of reading yet another article
by yet another straight person
explaining why I am less somehow
than everybody else.
You get fed up listening to people
describe you as intrinsically disordered,
people who don't even know you,
from their celibate pulpits.
You get fed up of the scrawled graffiti,
and you get fed up of people
sneeringly describe things as gay.
You get fed up of steeling yourself
to pass by the Saturday night drunks
hoping that they won't notice you,
and you get fed up of people
using their time and energies and talents
to campaign against you being treated
just like every other citizen.
(Applause)
I'm forty-five
and I'm fed up putting up.
Now I would, of course, prefer if nobody
harbored any animosity towards gay people
or any discomfort with gay relationships,
but, you know, I can live with the kind of
small, personal, private homophobia
that some people might have.
For example,
I can live with Mary in Wicklow
who sometimes turns on the television
and sees Graham Norton and thinks,
"Oh, he seems nice enough
but does he have to be so gay?"
(Laughter)
I can live with that.
I can live with Mary who doesn't
know any gay people,
apart from that fella who does her hair
once a month in "Curl Up and Dye".
(Laughter)
Mary, whose only knowledge of gay people
and our relationships
comes from what she has gleaned from
schoolyards, church and Coronation Street.
I can live with that.
I would be happy to sit down on the sofa
and watch Coronation Street with Mary.
I would be happy to have a cup of tea
with her and discuss with her
why she feels a little uncomfortable
with gay relationships
and I would hope that
Mary would change her mind.
I would hope that she would
meet more gay people
and find out pretty quickly that
we are just as ordinary, just as nice
or just as annoying
as all of you people are.
And I would hope that
she would change her mind
for her own sake
as much as anybody else's,
because gay people are just as capable
of bringing goodness into Mary's life
as anybody else.
And, of course, we could
help her with the decorating!
(Laughter)
But that kind of personal discomfort
with gay people and their relationships
is entirely different
from the kind of homophobia
that manifests itself in public.
The kind of homophobia
that manifests itself in an attempt
to have LGBT people treated differently
or less than everybody else.
The kind of homophobia that
seeks to characterize gay people
and their relationships
as less worthy of respect.
That kind of homophobia
I do have a problem with,
and I think gay people should be allowed
to call it when they see it,
because it is our right to do so!
Of course, many people
object to the word homophobia itself.
They object to the "phobia" part.
'I'm not afraid of you," they say.
(Laughter)
But I'm not saying
that homophobes cower in fear every time
they pass a Cher album,
(Laughter)
but they are afraid.
They are afraid of what the world
will look like
when it treats gay, lesbian
and bisexual people with the same respect
as everybody else.
They are afraid that they won't fit
in this brave new world of equality.
But, of course, their fear is irrational
because, of course, the world
will not look any different.
Kids will still want to eat ice cream,
dogs will still play fetch,
the tide will still come in,
and parallel parking
will still be difficult.
(Laughter)
The most vocal homophobes
who know that they long ago
lost the arguments around
the decriminalization of homosexual sex
or every other advance
for gay people since.
These days you will find
those very vocal homophobes
clustered around
the same-sex marriage debate --
and it is quite the spectacle
because, of course, they know
that they can't just come right out
and bluntly say what drives them,
which is an animus towards gay people,
and a disgust at what
they imagine we do in bed,
because they know that that won't wash
with the general public anymore.
So they are forced to sort of scramble
for any other reason
that they can think of
to argue their case.
So, gay people are going to destroy
the institution of marriage,
gay couples will be wandering through
orphanages picking babies off shelves
trying to find one that matches
their new IKEA sofa.
(Laughter)
Or that allowing gay people to get
married will destroy society itself,
and many, many more including
my own personal favorite,
which is the old argument that the word
"marriage" is defined in some dictionary
as a union between a man and a woman,
and that therefore same-sex marriage
can't possibly be a "marriage".
Which is a piffling argument against
words and dictionaries
and not an argument against
same-sex marriage.
(Applause)
Now, of course, the other real driver
of homophobia,
and you can all clutch your pearls here
because I am going to go here,
is a disgust with gay sex,
in particular with gay male sex.
The poor old lesbians just get caught
in the homophobic crossfire. (Laughter)
You know guilty by association.
Because what they really
don't like is anal sex,
sodomy, you know, buggery,
and they assume that that is all we do.
They feverishly imagine that we spend all
day jumping around buggering each other.
I mean they obsess on it, and, in fact,
what they actually do,
is reduce us down to this one sex act,
whether or not we do it at all,
because we are not regular people
with the same hopes and aspirations
and ambitions and feelings
as everyone else,
we are simply walking sex acts.
Earlier this year I was invited
to take part
in the St. Pat's for All parade
in Queens, New York.
Now it is a really lovely, charming,
grassroots event in Queens
which was set up in response to
the ban on gay groups marching
in the famous Manhattan
St. Patrick's Day Parade.
In that Manhattan St. Patrick's Day Parade
any Irish group who wants can march,
Irish policemen can march,
Irish firemen, Irish footballers,
Irish community groups,
Irish volleyball teams, Irish book clubs.
Any Irish people who want
to have a good shot
at being allowed to march
in that parade --
except for Irish gays,
because, as far as the organizers
of that parade are concerned,
gays are nothing more
than walking sex acts,
and there is no place for buggery
in their parade.
Now, I actually saw
a small documentary once
about one of the leaders of
the organizers of that parade,
they are the Ancient Order of Hibernians,
and they're like
a Catholic Orange Order
(Laughter)
-- they dress the same and everything --
and in the documentary, you know,
he was a nice old fellow,
and he had this lovely wife,
and they seemed very happy together.
And when I looked at them,
I saw this life lived together,
and I imagined if I asked him
about their life together,
that he would remember
the first time they met,
he would remember how nervous he was
on their first date together,
and how proud he was when he turned
and saw her coming up the aisle
in that dress that she had
fretted over for so long.
And I imagine that if I asked him,
he would remember that phone call
to say that she had gone into labor
and the dash across town,
and the other time when she
went so far past her due date
that she promised she would bounce up
and down on a trampoline
until the baby bounced out of her
and how they laughed so hard about that.
And I imagine he would
remember other occasions
like when their youngest broke his arm
and cried all the way to the hospital,
and that other time when she was sick and
he could not sleep alone in the empty bed
and so in the middle of the night he
got up and went back to the hospital
even though he knew they wouldn't
let him in to see her at that hour.
I imagine that he would remember all
of those things and many more.
All of the small things that go up
to making a relationship
and making a person a person.
And when I looked at him,
I imagined all of those things too.
But when he looks at me
he doesn't see me that way.
He doesn't see gay people that way.
To him we are just sex acts and there
is no place for sex acts in his parade.
I am forty-five years old
and I am fed up putting up.
So, I'm not anymore.
I'm forty-five years old
and I am not putting up anymore
because I don't have the energy anymore.
Putting up is exhausting!
I am forty-five years old
and I'm not putting up anymore
because I don't have
the patience anymore.
Forty-five years old! I was born
six months before the Stonewall riots,
and you have had
forty-five years to work out,
that despite appearances,
I am just as ordinary,
just as unremarkable,
and just as human as you are!
I'm forty-five years old
and I am not asking anymore
I am just being -- human being!
Thank you for your time!
(Applause)
Thank you! Thank you!